# Full Proposal on EUA Futures pricing determinants. – Jan Maciejowski

The subject of the research paper regards the market and non-market determinants of the prices of European CO2 Allowance Units, also known as EUAs within the European Union’s Emissions Trading System (ETS). The subject is going to focus on the derivative futures contracts as they are the most traded and liquid instruments of the broad market, therefore provide us with most viable representation of the system.

The project will consist of these specific steps starting with literature review (until January submission) regarding: first, ETS system functioning foundations, to delve into the most important mechanisms not only defining the price by artificially regulating the supply, but also the reasons for which such a market was created and how it directly helps to reduce gas emissions. Second, EUA price and regulatory forecasts, to understand what changes markets anticipate in the future. Third, drivers of the EUA Futures prices, to understand the already found list of direct and indirect causes to the instruments price. Fourth, evaluation of different statistical models used for a similar purpose in prior research, to connect all findings and formulate the affecting factors hypothesis. The next crucial step is data collection and cleaning (right after December contract settlement). After identifying possible factors and understanding of foundations, the stage of downloading and preparing all necessary, mostly time series, data will be conducted. All data will be downloaded from the Bloomberg Terminal to ensure highest quality. After that, the work will concentrate on various model tests and selection process (until end of February), based on previous literature findings different models will be tested to find the best optimal fit and explanation of our hypothesis. The findings from this step will be later aggregated and fully described, comprising of a full research document (until end of March).

While a good amount of high quality research is conducted by the EUs and national government agencies, as well as financial institutions, many academic findings were key in defining price affecting factors throughout the years. Marchewka-Bartkowiak (2023) provides for an overview of the ETS system and its effects on national budgets, pointing out European Commission controlled price factors directly affecting supply within the system like the market stability reserve and the linear reduction factor, both revised and made stricter by the Fit For 55 reform. Lovcha et al. (2022) identify current findings and aggregate important insights from many different past papers using various statistical models, meanwhile modelling factor importance with SVAR. They find oil, gas and to a lesser extend coal prices account for most of the variability of the data, with short-term effects resulting from speculative shocks. Wang & Zhao (2021) use Bayesian Networks for factor identification and forecast. They find that Brent, natural gas and the CAC40 index are the main price affecting factors. As they indicate macroeconomic factors also highly affect EUA yields. However, Chevallier (2009) argues that contrary to the market observers viewpoint, macroeconomic factors only have an indirect influence on the EUA Futures prices. As he proves mainly stock and bond markets have been found to have a statistical importance, whereas interest rates and government bill yields do not showcase that. Junk bond spreads showed low significance in some stages of the ETS. Salvagnin et al. (2024), in a more recent study, find that the factors highly differ depending on the ETS phase, where phase 3 was more macroeconomically and energy price driven, phase 4 shows signs of more financially oriented variables explaining the price movements.

Bibliography
Marchewka-Bartkowiak, K. (2023). The European Union Emission Trading System and its role for green budgeting development — the case of EU member states. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, Volume 65, 101390, ISSN 1877-3435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2023.101390.

Lovcha, Y., Perez-Laborda, A., Sikora, I. (2022). The determinants of CO2 prices in the EU emission trading system. Applied Energy, Volume 305, 117903, ISSN 0306-2619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117903.

Wang, Z., Zhao, L. (2021). The impact of the global stock and energy market on EU ETS: A structural equation modelling approach. Journal of Cleaner Production, Volume 289, 125140, ISSN 0959-6526. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125140.

Chevallier, J. (2009). Carbon futures and macroeconomic risk factors: A view from the EU ETS. Energy Economics, Volume 31, Issue 4, Pages 614-625, ISSN 0140-9883 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2009.02.008.

Salvagnin, C., Glielmo, A., De Giuli, M. E., & Mira, A. (2024). Investigating the price determinants of the European Emission Trading System: a non-parametric approach. Quantitative Finance, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2024.2407895.
